## Author(s)

- Eileen / @kmye

## Discussion & Voting Timeline

- Discussion open until 2025-10-23
- Voting starts when the author calls for it
- Voting ends on 2025-10-23 or when consensus is reached

## Summary

This ADR describes the implementation of a custom data upload feature in the Student Data Tool (SDT) to allow users to upload files containing diverse Student Data in a column-row data format.

## Motivation

Currently, SDT only supports uploading Student Data in a specific file contents generated by School Cockpit.
However, users often their own Excel files that they need to upload. Implementing a custom data upload feature will enhance user experience and broaden the tool's applicability.

## Detailed Design

We propose the following mechanism:

- File will be posted to server via a REST API endpoint.
- File will then be scanned with an anti-virus scanner to ensure no malicious content.
- SDT processes the file and extracts Student Data in backend.
- Custom data is stored in database and will be used to combine with data sources from School Cockpit.

Benefits:

- Unified file processing logic in backend.
- Reduced complexity in frontend code.
- Easier to maintain and extend file processing logic in future.
- Sensitive data is not processed in frontend browser.
- Reduced load on frontend browser.
- Easier to combine student data to server side data sources.
- Easier to implement logging and monitoring of file uploads.

## Alternatives Considered

- Do file processing in frontend browser and send Student Data as JSON payload back to backend for further processing.
  - Benefits:
    - Reduced load on backend server.
    - Sensitive data is not transferred over the internet network.
    - No need to refactor existing file processing logic.
  - Drawbacks:
    - Run validation logic on data for both in frontend and backend code.
    - Potentially larger payloads leading to performance issues.
    - More complex to combine student data to server side data sources.

## Drawbacks

- Existing file processing mechanism to be moved to backend to have a consistent and unified file processing logic.
- Increased attack surface of the application, requires the need to have a anti-virus file scanner in place to scan uploaded files.
- Needs to handle maximum size of uploaded files.
- There will be transfer of sensitive data via internet network, needs to ensure data is encrypted in transit and at rest.
